A reading from the book of Romans, chapter 8, verses 17 to 39. If you picked up a Bible on your way in, it's found on page 916. Now, if we are children, then we are heirs, heirs of God and co-heirs with Christ, if indeed we share in his sufferings in order that we may also share in his glory. I consider that our present sufferings are not worth comparing to the glory that will be revealed in us. For the creation waits in eager expectation for the children of God to be revealed. For the creation was subjected to frustration, not by its own choice, but by the will of the one who subjected it, in hope that the creation itself will be liberated from bondage to decay and brought into the freedom and glory of the children of God. We know that the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth, right up to the present time. Not only so, but we ourselves, who have the first fruits of the Spirit, groan inwardly as we wait eagerly for our adoption to sonship, the redemption of our bodies. For in this hope we were saved. But hope that is seen is no hope at all. Who hopes for what they already have? But if we hope for what we do not yet have, we wait for it patiently. In the same way, the Spirit helps us in our weakness. We do not know what we ought to pray for, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us through wordless groans. And he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for God's people in accordance with the will of God. And we know that in all things God works for the good of those who love him and who are called according to his purpose. For those God foreknew, he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the first born of many brothers and sisters. And those he predestined, he also called. Those he called, he also justified. Those he justified, he also glorified. What then shall we say in response to these things? If God is for us, who can be against us? He who did not spare his own Son, but gave him up for us all, how will he not also, along with him, graciously give us all things? Who will bring any charge against those whom God has chosen? It is God who justifies. Who then is the one who condemns? No one. Christ Jesus, who died, more than that, who was raised to life, is at the right hand of God and is also interceding for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall trouble, or hardship, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword? As it is written, for your sake we face death all day long. We are considered as sheep to be slaughtered. No, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us. For I am convinced that neither death, nor life, neither angels, nor demons, neither the present, nor the future, nor any powers, neither height, nor depth, nor anything else, in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord. The Word of the Lord. Julian, thanks so much for reading that so well for us. Well look, we're coming to the end of this sermon series we've been going through in Romans, and we're at the end of this section in chapters 5 to 8, which is all about how we live life. And it's fascinating that the Apostle Paul starts the section in chapter 5 verse 3 with this phrase that he really doesn't pick up until this part in chapter 8. He says that we glory, that is if we trust in Christ, we glory in our sufferings. And then he picks it up in our passage today in verse 18 where he says, I consider that our present sufferings are not worth comparing with the glory that will be revealed in us. And finally, in the kind of the crescendo of the passage in verse 35, he lists seven awful things in the world. Trouble, hardship, persecution, famine, nakedness, danger, or sword. And he uses a phrase where he says, but even over these things, as hard as they are, we can be more than conquerors. And really that's how the passage grabs you. You kind of read it, you go, really? Really? How can we go from suffering to glory? How can we go from those seven awful realities, almost like a perfect awfulness to them, to being not just conquerors but more than conquerors? How do you do that? And whoever we are this morning, this is one of the great questions we face. When I wasn't a Christian, I looked extensively at the question of suffering. What was fascinating to me was that there were at least three areas that philosophers would come back to time and time again as they tried to make sense, not just of the intellectual problem of suffering, but of the emotional, existential, human element of suffering. And they were the three of meaning. Is there any meaning in it? Comfort. How do you just get through it? Hope. Will it ever end? And what's fascinating is the Apostle Paul comes to this topic today as he deals with all three. We're going to see them today. As you look at meaning, things should not be this way. Comfort, we are not alone in our suffering if we know Christ. And hope, God will turn even our suffering, even our suffering into glory so that we can be more than conquerors. Come with me as we look at this in the passage today. First of all, let's think about meaning. Things shouldn't be this way. In the 18th century, atheist philosopher David Hume wrote this. Were a stranger to drop suddenly into this world, I would show him as a specimen of its ills, a hospital full of diseases, a prison crowded with malefacts and debtors, a field of battle strewn with carcasses, a fleet floundering the ocean, a nation languishing under tyranny, famine, or pestilence. He went on to say, honestly, I don't know how you can possibly square such a world with love. And it just feels so contemporary, and that's about 250 years old, but it could be the newspapers today, could it not? And I don't know where you're coming from today, but my understanding of just the way we are in the church family is that this will be very live for you. The particular issue of suffering. Maybe you come with a hidden grief this morning, a sudden diagnosis, a family member you're concerned about, a breakdown of a relationship, maybe your own mental health. And as you come into this Christmas season, everyone else around you is celebrating. In some ways, for many of us, it can accentuate the empty chair at the table, the sense of being alone, that things shouldn't be this way. But for you, I long that this passage will give you that strength this morning, not just to get through suffering, but actually to see how your suffering, in God's goodness and amazing purposes, can become something to glory. And I don't say that lightly. And my family and I have been going through a tough time recently, some of you will know about that. This has really spoken to me this week, and has given me the emotional resources I need to just get through another week and keep going. God is good. And one of the ways we cope with that is by an ability to understand and make sense of suffering. Because the great question that comes whenever we experience suffering, it's not just an intellectual question, it's very much a human existential question, is why? Why? Why is this happening? Why is this happening to me? Why, Lord? It echoes throughout the old pages, the pages of the Old Testament, as the prophets, time and time again, cry out, why? That is to say that if you believe in God, the question doesn't go away. In some ways, the question hones to a finer point, why? Singer-songwriter Ed Ames framed the search for meaning in the question, why this way? From the canyons of the mind, we wander on and stumble blind, hoping for some kind of clue, a road to lead us to the truth, but who will answer? Through the often tangled maze of starless nights and sunless days, who will answer? Who will answer? Who will answer? We have that question, we're crying out to the universe, who will answer? Is there any answer to this question of why? You see, there's a longing for meaning because we need meaning to make sense of it. Why? Now, one of the things that's coming up today in contemporary culture is this idea that we are meaning-making beings, but there isn't actually any meaning out there. It's particularly prevalent in the psychology of Jung. He was picked up and pivoted on Freud on this, and it comes up very, very eloquently put across by thinkers like Jordan Peterson. And the illustration that Jung used was we are like sailors who look up at the night sky and see the night stars, and then we impose meaning on them. So we say, oh look, that one looks a bit like a lion, and we call it Leo. Or that one, I could make up a story about a hunter, and we call it Sagittarius. But there is no actual meaning there. It's the subconscious expressing itself and imposing itself on reality, and we need that to get through, but it's not real. It's a myth. They're just mythical archetypes or types. But Scripture would want to say, no, you've got that completely the wrong way around. And actually, the illustration gives it away, doesn't it? Because sailors use the stars to navigate in reality. The constellations really are there. Now, of course, I'm not saying there's a lion in the night sky, but there is the constellation which gives it its name, which is why you can actually navigate through a dark night when you can see the stars, because they really do get you to where you want to go. In other words, there really is a Ryan Spell. We just named it that way and given a story. The stories might be myths, but the reality is there. And so psychologically, we're not just imposing ourselves on an endless search for meaning when there is none. No, it's topsy-turvy. It's the other way around. There is meaning out there. We're searching for it, and we're asking why. And God says in our passage today, I will tell you why. And so we see it in our passage in verse 20, validating the deepest intuition of our hearts, which is the world might be good, but it should not be this way. Look at verse 20 with me. For the creation was subjected to frustration, not by its own choice, but by the will of the one who subjected it, in hope that the creation itself will be liberated, set free from its bondage to decay, and brought into the freedom and glory of the children of God. Notice at least two things there. First of all, it's a creation. God created it with intentionality, with goodness, with value, and with meaning. That validates the first thing which we need, which is the world is good. But notice the second thing is the world is frustrated. It should not be this way. This is referring back to the fall in space, time, and history, when Adam and Eve turned away from God. And because of that fracture in their relationship with God, caused about by their rejection of him, that fracture has caused fissures and cracks throughout all of creation. Maybe you're experiencing the cracks in your own life, in your own psyche. Maybe you see them out there on the pages of the news. But that's all because the creation is good, but it shouldn't be this way. And the Christian story, the true story, says, yeah, everything in your fiber of your being cries out it shouldn't be this way. And it says, yes, it shouldn't be this way. And then more than that, it also says one day it won't be this way. Now we fill in our hearts, don't we? Our loved ones shouldn't die. Children shouldn't cry. Bodies shouldn't age and break. Relationships and communities should not fracture and fall apart. And Scripture validates this and says there is a world coming, one where that will not be true anymore. For the creation was subject to futility. Yes, but verse 21, the creation itself now groans because it longs to be set free from its bondage to corruption and obtain the freedom of the glory of the children of God. See, there are two bookends to meaning to the problem of suffering. The first one is it wasn't this way and it shouldn't be this way. And the second is that one day it will not be this way. And that's the narrative arc that makes sense of it all. One day there'll be no more death. One day there'll be no more disease. One day our bodies won't break and give out. One day relationships won't fracture. One day hunger will be replaced by plenty. One day tears will be replaced by laughter and joy unending. One day injustice will be washed away by the rivers of God's righteousness. One day. That's the meaning that makes sense of it all. And there's more than that. You and I will be redeemed because we're pivotal to the creation, because we're rulers over the creation, Scripture says. And so when we are made new, really new, physical bodies made new, our psyches made new, our relationship with God perfectly realized and enjoyed, at that moment the whole of creation will be made new. Not some will-o'-the-wisp existence as though we're disembodied spirits floating around in the ether for eternity. But this world, everything good about it, all made new. That's the story. That's the true and better story. Which means there'll be physical relationships. There'll be high-fives and hugs. There'll be running and jumping. There'll be a city. There'll be creation. There'll be birds and bees and trees and brooks babbling. And we'll be there if you trust in Christ. That's the meaning. And I guess the question is, if there is no ultimate meaning in this world, how do you deal with suffering? You see, there's a great difference between the two words pain and suffering. Pain is the physical or emotional sensation. Ouch. But pain could be good, right? You know, the right type of pain, antiseptic, can help you. But how do you apply the value-laden term of suffering which says it should not be this way? If you don't believe in God, there is no ultimate meaning. You just have pain. And you just sort of expect that in a blind and pitiless world of forces that are chaotic. People are going to get hurt. Deal with it. I can't live that way, and I put it to you, you can't live that way. I need to know that there's an arc to make sense of it all. This is not my subconscious imposing it on the world. This is the reality of God in the world telling me the way things are. And it helps me navigate my way through even the darkest nights, even the starless nights. I can find the true north and I can get through it. Meaning. But secondly, we need more than that, don't we? We need comfort. And in verses 26 to 27, we see we are not alone in our suffering. Look at verse 26 on page 917. In the same way the Spirit helps us in our weakness, we do not know what we ought to pray for, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us through wordless groans. And he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for God's peopling in accordance with the will of God. This is talking about the way that God has not just given us an answer to suffering, but he's given us the greatest gift of all. Himself in the midst of suffering. His very Spirit, the third person of the Trinity in your heart, if you know Christ, he's with you intimately there all the time and he'll never leave you or forsake you. Sometimes of an evening I need some highbrow entertainment to get me through, so I watch SWAT, the TV series on Netflix. It's very complex. It's about the LAPD SWAT. And so they have an enemy and they defeat the enemy and they high-five at the end of it. It's great. Rebecca can never quite work out why I'm watching it. Just occasionally though, it does make a profound point. I was watching an episode a few weeks back where there was a young woman and she was in a car crash and everyone else got out the car, but she was traumatized from a previous experience and so she froze. And she's in the car and the car catches fire. And they can't get to her because of the way that the car is being crushed. And so the SWAT officer is there and he's trying to cajole her, trying to get her to get out of the car, but she's completely frozen. All she needs to do is unclip her seatbelt and climb out, but she's too frightened. And then he does something amazing. He climbs into the front seat with her. He still can't reach her quite, but then he's there. She says, what are you doing? He says, I'm here with you. I'm not leaving and getting out until you leave and get out. We're in this together. And amidst the flames and amid the car crash, she calms down because he's there with her. She unfreezes. She unclips herself and they both climb out. You know, quite often this life feels like a car crash and there are flames around us. And sometimes we freeze and we say, I can't get through it. And in the midst of that, what does God do? He doesn't just shout answers at you from a distance. He climbs into the car with you. He gets into the car crash with you. The flames are burning all around you and you're frozen. He said, I'm with you. And you say, oh, that sounds too good to be true. Just Christian hyperbole. No, it's true. How do you know it's true? Because in the person of Jesus Christ, and this is whose spirit it is, the Spirit of Christ. In the person of Jesus Christ, you know what you see? You see God prepared to take the car crash. You see God prepared to step into the flames where you and I should be for you and I. Jesus Christ is the only God with scars. Why? Because he didn't stay outside safe and secure barking orders at us from a distance. No, in Jesus Christ, God gets real. God takes on the pain and the suffering. God experiences the car crash of suffering. He takes the fires of God's judgment on the cross so that you and I don't have to take them, so that we can get out of the car crash. And so when he says, I've sent you my spirit, it's the very same spirit of Christ. It's the one who died on the cross for you if you know him. It's the one who gave up everything for you. It's the one who took the flames of God's judgment for you. And so when he says to you, I'm with you, he's the only God who's qualified to say that. That's why we have counseling support groups of people who've been through the particular difficulties that we are going through. Because they're the only people who can step in and say these words, I know what you're going through. The Holy Spirit draws near to us in our moments of greatest pain. He says to us, I know what you're going through. I'm with you. I will not leave you. And do you notice how even in this passage, it anticipates that moment when there's such acute pain that you can't even pray. As a pastor, I know the other pastor at Redeemer Downtown have experienced this. Sometimes I meet with people where they're so sad, they just can't pray. And in those moments, this is the passage I go to. I say, you may not have the words. You may be frozen right now. The Spirit is still praying for you. Do you see that? The Spirit himself intercedes for God's people. He does it through wordless groans. Sometimes all you want to do is sit with a person and just go, ah. The Spirit gets that. He's with you. He's comforting you and he won't leave you until we all climb out of this car crash together. In the same way, the Spirit helps us in our weakness. Don't you see God's greatest gift in the face of suffering is not only kneeling but himself in the midst of the fire. And lastly, hope. God will turn even our suffering into glory. Verse 28 to 30. These are just some wonderful verses and we'll take them too quickly, but I hope they speak to you. Verse 28, we know that in all things God works for the good of those who love him, who have been called according to his purpose. And then listen to this process of getting us through suffering. For those God foreknew, he predestined to be conformed, made in the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brothers and sisters. And here it is. And those he predestined, he called. And those he called, he justified. And those he justified, he glorified. Please notice it's all put in the past tense, though a fair bit of this is happening in the future. Why? Well, it's a rhetorical device called the prophetic path. It's a way of saying it's as good as done, because the infinitely wise and sovereign Lord will make it so. And so we haven't been glorified yet, but we will one day. It's as good as done. And the importance of this process, this narrative, is a counter-narrative to the narrative of your hearts when you suffer. And what is the narrative of your hearts when you suffer? If it's anything like mine, it goes like this. Because I'm suffering, if there's a God, he doesn't love me. And if he doesn't love me, then he's abandoned me. And if he's abandoned me, then I'm alone. And if I'm really alone, then everything's gonna unravel, and I've got no confidence about the future. You see that? But notice how this speaks a true and better word than that. We say, he doesn't love me, and it says, no, he foreknew you, which is he knew you before the beginning of time, and he's predestined you, which means he's set his love upon you. And if he's done that, he's never taken away. So he loves you. And then it says, because you're predestined, he's called you. So the counter-narrative says he doesn't love you, and he's abandoned you. No, no, no. He's called you. He's saying, I'm with you. Come to me. I want you. And God's calling is not like a human calling. When I call my children, it's kind of 50-50 at best. On a good day, when they're gonna come. Whoever God calls, comes. Wouldn't that be nice? Those predestined, he calls. And then we say, well, if he's abandoned me, I'm alone. And this says, no, you're not alone, because he's called you. You're justified, which means you're righteous in his sight, which means when he looks at you, he sees the perfection of Jesus, and he could not love Jesus anymore. And therefore, he could not love you anymore. And then it says, because he's justified you, he will glorify you. The counter-narrative says, if I'm truly alone, it's all gonna unravel. It's all gonna unravel. And this says, no, it will not unravel. In fact, it's not only is it not going to unravel, there will be glory at the end of it all. And a glory, which the Bible has the temerity to say, will outweigh the sufferings of this world. How can you even say that? It will outweigh. Haven't you seen the news? Haven't you seen what I'm going through? Yes, but we haven't seen the glory. We don't know the weight of glory and how much it will outweigh these things. And do you see how beautifully the scripture anticipates the cries of our hearts? You see, immediately our hearts cry out. How can I be sure? How can I know? I need something to anchor my heart and really convince my wayward heart that this is true. And verse 32 says, he who did not spare his own son but gave him up for us all, how will he not also along with him graciously give us all things? Think about it with me for a moment. Even human parents, good human parents, will always prioritize their children over everything else, right? A wise and loving human parent will always put their children first, such that mothers will run into burning buildings for their children. Fathers will jump into raging rivers for their children. But we are just human beings. We're fallen. We're frail and we're sinful. God has loved his son, Jesus Christ, from eternity past with an unshakable perfect love that makes even the fiercest love of a parent look like a pale imitation of the real thing. And yet he has, for you and I, given him up. Do you think he loves him any less than a mother who would run into a burning building for a child? No, he loves them more. But he gave him up. Why? Why would he do that? Oh my friend, for you. He gave him up for you. So that when your heart says there's no meaning, there's no comfort, and frankly there's no hope, this argues with your heart and says if he died then I don't doubt God's love. He'll give me everything, anything. He will get me through this night. He will deliver me into the sun of righteousness on that day when everything is glorified. It will be true. And so to make the point the Apostle Paul frames it with a new word, only used once in scripture, this word that we translate more than conquerors. At other times he uses the word conqueror or victor, but he attaches the beginning part of it, the word hyper, to make an overstatement. He says we are more than conquerors. Think about it this way. When a sports team takes the field or when an army takes the battlefield, no matter how good they are on paper, no matter how much the odds are in their favor, there's always a chance, right, that they're not going to be victorious. There's always a chance. And so they emerge the victor at the end, but it was kind of in doubt for a period, right? But to enter the battlefield of life, facing the war of suffering, knowing you're more than a conqueror, is to say it's never in doubt. The result's not in doubt. The victory's been won in Christ because he gave Jesus up for you. He will give you all things and therefore you have meaning to make sense of it, you have his comfort in the midst of it, and you have the sure and certain hope that one day, one day, we don't know how, we'll stand in glory with resurrected bodies in this world made new. We'll look around and we'll go, it's true. It really does outweigh our sufferings. I didn't think it was possible in the midst of the suffering, but now that I'm here, now that you're here, it's true. And that means you can be more than conqueror if you trust in Christ. Let me pray. Heavenly Father, we need these words, Lord, whatever we're going through. For some of us this morning, we need them right now. For others, maybe this is something to put in the spiritual bank, so to speak, for that day, which sadly, all too surely, will come when we face suffering. But right now, Lord, we pray you administer to us, persuade us of the truth of these words, the truth that is grounded in the reality of the Lord Jesus Christ, his life lived for us, his death died for us, his resurrection wrought for us, and the sending of the Spirit. And so we pray that we would know and experience your comfort, your presence in our lives, and keep us, I pray, until that day when the glory of the world to come will outweigh the sufferings of this world. We pray this for Jesus' sake. Amen.